Here are Simple programs to accomplish each of the specified tasks:

a) Input three integers, determine their average and print the result.

10 rem calculate average of three integers
20 input a
30 input b
40 input c
50 let sum = a + b + c
60 let average = sum / 3
70 print average
80 rem terminate program execution
99 end


b) Use a sentinel-controlled loop to input 10 integers and compute and print their sum.

10 rem calculate sum of integers using sentinel-controlled loop (actually inputs until -9999)
20 let sum = 0
30 let count = 0
40 input i
50 if i == -9999 goto 90
60 let sum = sum + i
70 let count = count + 1
80 goto 40
90 print sum
99 end

Note: Modified to use -9999 as sentinel; adjust logic if strictly 10 inputs are needed without sentinel.

c) Use a counter-controlled loop to input 7 integers, some positive and some negative, and compute and print their average.

10 rem calculate average of 7 integers
20 let sum = 0
30 let count = 0
40 input i
50 let sum = sum + i
60 let count = count + 1
70 if count >= 7 goto 90
80 goto 40
90 let average = sum / 7
100 print average
99 end


d) Input a series of integers and determine and print the largest. The first integer input indicates how many numbers should be processed.

10 rem find largest of series of integers
20 input n
30 input largest
40 let count = 1
50 if count >= n goto 90
60 input i
70 if i > largest goto 80
75 goto 85
80 let largest = i
85 let count = count + 1
90 goto 50
100 print largest
99 end


e) Input 10 integers and print the smallest.

10 rem find smallest of 10 integers
20 input i
30 let smallest = i
40 let count = 1
50 if count >= 10 goto 100
60 input j
70 if j < smallest goto 80
75 goto 90
80 let smallest = j
90 let count = count + 1
95 goto 50
100 print smallest
99 end


f) Calculate and print the sum of the even integers from 2 to 30.

10 rem sum of even integers from 2 to 30
20 let sum = 0
30 let i = 2
40 if i > 30 goto 80
50 let sum = sum + i
60 let i = i + 2
70 goto 40
80 print sum
99 end


g) Calculate and print the product of the odd integers from 1 to 9.

10 rem product of odd integers from 1 to 9
20 let product = 1
30 let i = 1
40 if i > 9 goto 80
50 let product = product * i
60 let i = i + 2
70 goto 40
80 print product
99 end

Building a Simple compiler sounds like an exciting project! Let's break down the process and key components involved.

Overview of the Compilation Process
The Simple compiler converts Simple language programs into Simple Machine Language (SML) code, which can be executed by the Simpletron simulator. This process involves two passes:
1. First Pass: Constructs a symbol table and generates preliminary SML instructions. Some instructions might be incomplete due to forward references.
2. Second Pass: Resolves unresolved references and finalizes the SML code.

Key Components
- Symbol Table: Stores line numbers, variables, and constants with their types ('L', 'V', 'C') and SML memory locations.
- TableEntry: Represents each symbol with fields for symbol, type, and location.
- Flags Array: Tracks unresolved references (initialized to -1).
- SML Array: Holds the generated machine language instructions.

Compilation Steps
1. Tokenization: Breaks Simple statements into tokens (line numbers, commands, variables, constants).
2. Symbol Table Population: Inserts symbols into the table with appropriate types and locations.
3. SML Instruction Generation: Translates Simple commands into SML instructions.
    - rem: Ignored, but line number is stored.
    - input, print, goto, end: Directly map to SML instructions (read, write, branch, halt).
    - if/goto: Simulated using branch zero/negative instructions.
    - let: Involves infix-to-postfix conversion and postfix evaluation to generate SML code.

Challenges and Considerations
- Forward References: Handled in the second pass by resolving references stored in the flags array.
- Memory Management: Compiler must track instruction and data locations, checking for memory exhaustion.
- Redundant Instructions: Might appear in generated SML code; optimization could be considered.

Tasks for Building the Compiler
a) Modify Simpletron Simulator: Read input from a file, output to disk, and refactor for object-oriented design.
b) Modify Infix-to-Postfix Algorithm: Handle multidigit integers and single-letter variable names.
c) Modify Postfix Evaluation: Generate SML instructions instead of direct evaluation, supporting variables and constants.
d) Implement Compiler: Incorporate modified algorithms, perform two passes, and design object-oriented structure.

This project offers a deep dive into compiler construction principles and practical implementation challenges!

Let's explore the modifications to enhance the Simple compiler and Simpletron simulator.

Modifications Overview
These enhancements expand Simple's capabilities, requiring adjustments to both the compiler and, in some cases, the Simpletron simulator.

a) Remainder Operator (%)
- Compiler Change: Recognize % in let statements, generate SML code for remainder operation.
- Simpletron Change: Add SML instruction (e.g., REM opcode) to compute remainder.

b) Exponentiation (^)
- Compiler Change: Handle ^ in expressions, convert to postfix, generate SML for exponentiation.
- Simpletron Change: Introduce SML instruction (e.g., EXP opcode) for exponentiation.

c) Case Insensitivity
- Compiler Change: Convert input Simple code to lowercase (or handle case-insensitively), ensuring symbols are treated uniformly.
- Simpletron Change: None required.

d) Multiple Input Variables
- Compiler Change: Parse input x, y; generate SML to read multiple values sequentially.
- Simpletron Change: None required; simulator's read operation can be invoked multiple times.

e) Multiple Print Values
- Compiler Change: Handle print a, b, c; emit SML write instructions for each variable.
- Simpletron Change: None needed; multiple write operations can be executed.

f) Syntax Checking
- Compiler Change: Implement checks for syntax errors (e.g., undefined variables, malformed statements), output meaningful error messages.
- Simpletron Change: None required.

g) Integer Arrays
- Compiler Change: Support array declarations, indexing; manage symbol table entries for arrays.
- Simpletron Change: None explicitly needed; compiler manages array access SML translation.

h) Subroutines (gosub/return)
- Compiler Change: Recognize gosub/return, manage call stack/return addresses in SML.
- Simpletron Change: None required; handled via compiler-generated SML control flow.

i/j) For Loops
- Compiler Change: Implement for loop parsing, generate SML for loop control (init, test, increment, body).
- Simpletron Change: None needed; compiler translates loops into SML constructs.

k) String Processing
- Compiler Change: Handle string literals, operations; adjust symbol table for strings.
- Simpletron Change: Modify to store/retrieve/print strings (e.g., using half-words for Unicode chars).

l) Floating-Point Support
- Compiler Change: Extend to parse/handle float literals, operations; adjust SML generation.
- Simpletron Change: Adapt simulator's ALU, registers, memory to handle floating-point arithmetic.

Considerations
- SML Instruction Set: Extensions must fit Simpletron's architecture.
- Symbol Table Management: Adapt for new data types/features (arrays, strings, floats).
- Error Handling: Robust syntax checking enhances usability.
- Testing: Comprehensive test cases validate each enhancement.

These modifications significantly broaden Simple's expressiveness and applicability!


Let's delve into creating an interpreter for the Simple language, leveraging the infix-to-postfix converter and postfix evaluator developed earlier.

Interpreter Overview
The Simple interpreter directly executes Simple language statements without prior compilation to machine language (SML), contrasting with the compiler approach.

Key Components
1. Infix-to-Postfix Converter: Transforms expressions from infix notation to postfix.
2. Postfix Evaluator: Computes the value of postfix expressions.
3. Symbol Table: Stores variables' names and current values.
4. Statement Interpreter: Processes Simple statements (rem, input, let, print, goto, if/goto, end).

Interpreter Workflow
1. Read Simple Program: Load statements into memory.
2. Parse Statements: Tokenize and interpret each statement's command and operands.
3. Execute Statements:
    - *rem*: Skip (comment).
    - *input*: Read value, update symbol table.
    - *let*: Evaluate expression (infix → postfix → evaluate), assign result.
    - *print*: Output variable/value from symbol table.
    - *goto*: Alter program counter (PC).
    - *if/goto*: Evaluate condition, branch if true.
    - *end*: Terminate execution.

Implementation Considerations
- Symbol Table Management: Store/retrieve variable values efficiently.
- Expression Evaluation: Utilize modified infix-to-postfix and postfix evaluator for variables/constants.
- Control Flow: Implement goto, if/goto logic correctly.
- Error Handling: Detect/report runtime errors (undefined variables, division by zero).

Utilizing Existing Components
- Infix-to-Postfix (Exercise 21.12): Adapt for Simple's grammar, variables/constants.
- Postfix Evaluator (Exercise 21.13): Modify to lookup variables in symbol table, handle Simple's operators.

Testing Strategy
- Simple Programs (Exercise 21.30): Run interpreter on examples (sum, larger of two integers, squares).
- Comparison: Contrast interpreter results with compiled SML execution via Simpletron simulator.

Pros and Cons
- Interpreter Pros: Immediate execution, potentially easier debugging.
- Interpreter Cons: Generally slower than compiled code, especially for loops.

Example Walkthrough
For a Simple program like:

10 input x
20 let y = x * x
30 print y
99 end

1. *Input x*: Store in symbol table.
2. *Evaluate x * x*: Infix → postfix (x x *) → evaluate using symbol table value.
3. *Print y*: Output computed value.

This interpreter approach offers direct execution of Simple programs, bypassing explicit compilation to SML.